ref: document cloud versioned remotes (#4165)
iterative/dvc.org: content/docs/user-guide/data-management/cloud-versioning.md

# Cloud Versioning

<admon type="warn">

Cloud versioning features are currently under active development and should be
considered experimental. These features are subject to frequent change, and the
documentation may not always reflect changes available in the latest DVC
release.

</admon>

When cloud versioning is enabled, DVC will store files in the remote according
to their original directory location and filenames. Different versions of a file
will then be stored as separate versions of the corresponding object in cloud
storage. This is useful for cases where users prefer to retain their original
filenames and directory hierarchy in remote storage (instead of using DVC's
usual
[content-addressible storage](/doc/user-guide/project-structure/internal-files#structure-of-the-cache-directory)
format).

<admon type="warn">

Note that not all DVC functionality is supported when using cloud versioned
remotes, and using cloud versioning comes with the tradeoff of losing certain

> benefits of content-addressible storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
benefits of content-addressable storage.
```

> benefits of content-addressable storage.

Reviewer 2: What specific functionality is not available? The hidden section below only states that "DVC does not provide de-duplication, and certain remote storage performance optimizations will be unavailable".

Author: pretty much anything that isn't explicitly documented as a cloud-versioning-enabled command/feature

But off the top of my head, some of the things that don't work are:

- `dvc import` from a DVC repo that uses cloud versioned remote(s)
- run cache (it works locally but you cannot push/pull it with cloud versioned remotes)
- `gc -c`
- `status -c`
- `exp` sharing (anything that requires `exp push/pull`)
- `dvc push` with revision flags (you cannot `dvc push --all-branches/--all-tags/--all-commits` to cloud versioned remotes, but `dvc pull` will work with the flags)

Reviewer 2: It may be worth it to rephrase this and other texts then, to emphasize that A LOT of features don't work with cloud versioned data remotes.

Currently, it is supported on the following `dvc remote` types:

- Amazon S3 (requires
  [S3 Versioning](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/Versioning.html)
  enabled buckets)
- Microsoft Azure Blob Storage (requires
  [Blob versioning](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/versioning-overview)
  enabled storage accounts and containers)
- Google Cloud Storage (requires
  [Object versioning](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/object-versioning)
  enabled buckets)

## Version-aware remotes

When the `version_aware` option is enabled on a `dvc remote`:

- `dvc push` will utilize cloud versioning when storing data in the remote. Data
  will retain its original directory structure and filenames, and each version
  of a file tracked by DVC will be stored as a new version of the corresponding
  object in cloud storage.
- `dvc fetch` and `dvc pull` will download the corresponding version of an
  object from cloud storage.

<admon type="warn">

Note that when `version_aware` is in use, DVC does not delete current versions
or restore noncurrent versions of objects in cloud storage. So the current

> version of an object in cloud storage may not match the version of a file in your DVC repository.

Reviewer 2: Can we re-explain this in simpler terms? I'm not sure I get it but it seems key (and the differenve vs. worktree remotes).

> BTW do we have a dummy versioned bucket to play with by any chance?

Author: I'm not really sure there is a simpler way to explain it. The assumption here is that users have at least a basic understanding of how cloud versioning works in S3/azure/GCS.

Deleting a file from a versioned bucket in cloud storage does not delete any data, but it sets a flag that says the file is "deleted" (i.e. it becomes hidden). So if you delete a file on S3, and then ask S3 for the latest version of that file, it will say the file does not exist. But if you want to access the older versions of that file, you can still get them from S3 (as long as you ask for the specific version you want, and not just "latest/current version of file"). Likewise, by default S3 gives you the most recent (current) version of a file unless you request a specific version. So when you look at the bucket in the S3 console, you would only see the latest/current versions of what is in your bucket.

Also, it's important to note that in versioned storage you can only ever add new versions of a file (you cannot revert to an older version so that the old version becomes the current/latest version).  Doing a "revert" operation actually creates a new copy of the older version of the file (and the duplicate costs against your S3 storage quota, even though they are identical).

---

For `worktree`, we tell S3 to "delete" files that are not in the DVC repo (so the latest/current version of a bucket looks like a mirror of the DVC repo). Likewise, for files that do exist in both the DVC repo and the bucket, we make sure the "latest/current" version always matches the DVC repo. If you have someone manually editing files in the bucket, or two people pushing from different branches in the DVC repo, each `dvc push` will overwrite the latest/current version with a new copy of files (that match the repo at the time a user does `dvc push`). (this will result in duplicated data)

For `version_aware`, we don't bother deleting anything, we only care about whether or not the version we care about was pushed at some point in time. Meaning the "latest/current" version of files in your bucket may not actually represent the latest version of your DVC repo. As long as the version of a file from our DVC repo was pushed at some point in time (and that pushed version still exists in the bucket) we won't push duplicate data.

Reviewer 2: Yes, there should be a simpler way to explain it, or maybe it's not needed. TBH I don't even know what the point of the admonition is. What's the warning? Esp. if we're assuming the user knows how versioned storage works -- shouldn't it be obvious that DVC can't delete anything (since it can't be done) ?

> whether or not the version we care about was pushed at some point in time. Meaning the "latest/current" version of files in your bucket may not actually represent the latest version of your DVC repo

I think this is closer to what we're trying to emphasize here. Maybe something like:

"Because versioned storage does not allow true deletions or directly restoring old versions [link somewhere], there may be situations where the latest data in your DVC repo does not match what you see as latest versions in the bucket."

It doesn't fully explain how those situations happen but I think that's what we're trying to make a note about.

> p.s. sorry very late reply cc @dberenbaum

# Cloud Versioning

`dvc remote` storage normally uses
[content-addressible storage](/doc/user-guide/project-structure/internal-files#structure-of-the-cache-directory)
to organize versioned data. Different versions of files are stored in the remote
according to hash of their data content instead of according to their original
filenames and directory location. This allows DVC to optimize certain remote
storage lookup and data sync operations, and provides data de-duplication at the
file level. However, this comes with the drawback of losing human-readable
filenames without the use of the DVC CLI (`dvc get --show-url`) or API
(`dvc.api.get_url()`).

DVC supports the use of cloud object versioning for cases where users prefer to
retain their original filenames and directory hierarchy in remote storage, in
exchange for losing the de-duplication and performance benefits of
content-addressible storage. When cloud versioning is enabled, DVC will store
files in the remote according to their original directory location and
filenames. Different versions of a file will then be stored as separate versions

> of the corresponding object in cloud storage.

Reviewer: > When cloud versioning is enabled, DVC will store
files in the remote according to their original directory location and
filenames. Different versions of a file will then be stored as separate versions
of the corresponding object in cloud storage.

I'd suggest starting Cloud Versioning with this part, and then explain the differences from the default content-addressable storage (possible in its own section or collapsible info blurb).

⚠️ Note that not all DVC functionality is supported when using cloud versioned
remotes.

## Supported storage providers

Cloud versioning features are only avaible for certain storage providers.
Currently, it is supported on the following `dvc remote` types:

- Amazon S3 (requires
  [S3 Versioning](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/Versioning.html)
  enabled buckets)
- Microsoft Azure Blob Storage (requires
  [Blob versioning](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/versioning-overview)
  enabled storage accounts and containers)
- Google Cloud Storage (requires
  [Object versioning](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/object-versioning)
  enabled buckets)

## Version-aware remotes

When the `version_aware` option is enabled on a `dvc remote`:

- `dvc push` will utilize cloud versioning when storing data in the remote. Data
  will retain its original directory structure and filenames, and each version
  of a file tracked by DVC will be stored as a new version of the corresponding
  object in cloud storage.
- `dvc fetch` and `dvc pull` will download the corresponding version of an
  object from cloud storage.

> ⚠️ Note that when `version_aware` is in use, DVC does not set DELETE flags on
> objects in cloud storage, and does not make any attempt to ensure that the
> latest version of an object in cloud storage matches the latest version of a
> file in your DVC repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
⚠️ Note that when `version_aware` is in use, DVC does not delete current versions
or restore noncurrent versions of objects in cloud storage, so the current version of an object
in cloud storage may not match the latest version of a file in your DVC repository.
```

Tried to use language that was most common across the cloud versioning docs in:
* https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/versioning-workflows.html
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/versioning-overview
* https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/object-versioning

Reviewer: Actually, I would move this down and combine it with the `Worktree remotes` section since it's more useful in comparison.

## Worktree remotes

> When the `worktree` option is enabled on a `dvc remote`:

Reviewer: Can you frame the `Worktree remotes` section in comparison to `Version-aware remotes`, like:

```
When the `worktree` option is enabled on a `dvc remote`, it does the same as `version_aware`, and in addition:
```

Then you could cut the rest of this section down to focus only on the differences instead of a mix of repeated and new info.

- `dvc push` will utilize cloud versioning and ensure that the "latest" version
  of the remote storage is a mirror of your current local DVC repository
  workspace. Data in cloud storage will retain its original directory structure
  and filenames, and each version of a file tracked by DVC will be stored as a
  new version of the corresponding object in cloud storage. Additionally, DVC
  will set the DELETE flag on any objects which were present in cloud storage
  but that do not exist in your current DVC repository workspace.
- `dvc fetch` and `dvc pull` will download the corresponding version of an
  object from cloud storage.
- `dvc update` can be used to update a DVC-tracked file or directory in your

>   current workspace to match the latest version of the corresponding object(s)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  current workspace to match the current version of the corresponding object(s)
```

  from cloud storage.

> ⚠️ Note that setting DELETE flags does not delete any object versions (and does
> not delete any data) from cloud storage, it only means that the "latest" version
> of a given object will show that the object does not exist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
⚠️ Note that deleting current versions does not delete any objects (and does
not delete any data) from cloud storage, it only means that the current version
of a given object will show that the object does not exist.
```
